---
title: "#2. Understanding IPv4: Classes, Subnetting, and Addressing"
excerpt: "This post covers the basics of IPv4, including address classes, subnetting, and network identification. It provides essential knowledge for effective networking and device communication."

categories:
  - Networking
tags:
  - [Network, IP, Subnetting]

permalink: /networking/post-2-230829/

toc: true
toc_sticky: true

date: 2023-08-29
last_modified_at: 2023-08-29
---
# IP (Internet Protocol)
---
- Core component of the internet, governing how data packets are addressed, transmitted, and routed across networks
- Plays a crucial role in enabling devices to communicate with one another over the internet

### 1. Purpose
IP's primary purpose is to facilitate the transfer of data packets between devices connected to a network, enabling them to communicate effectively.
　

### 2. IP Address
An IP address is a unique identifier assigned to each device on a network. It functions like a mailing address, allowing data packets to be sent to and from specific devices.<br>
- **IPv4:** The most common version, using a 32-bit addressing scheme, providing about 4.3 billion unique addresses (e.g., `192.168.1.1`).
- **IPv6:** A newer version designed to solve IPv4 address exhaustion, utilising a 128-bit addressing scheme to accommodate the growing number of devices connected to the internet (e.g.`2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334`)

　
### 3. Key Features of IPv4
- **IPv4**: Updated 4 times
- Initially developed for military communication in the United States, it was not initially intended to be an international standard
- **Structure**
    - Composed of four octets: `__.__.__.__`
    - Each octet consists of **8 bits**, allowing for values from `0 to 255`(i.e.2^8 - 1)
    - Total of **32 bits across the four octets**, which allows for approximately 4.3 billion IP addresses
- **IP Range**: `0.0.0.0` to `255.255.255.255`

　
### 4. Network ID / Host ID
- <span style="background-color:#FFFACD"> **&nbsp;Network ID&nbsp;** </span>
    - Identifies a specific network segment
    - Allows devices within the same network to communicate
    - Example: In `192.168.1.0`, the Network ID is `192.168.1`
- <span style="background-color:#F0F8FF"> **&nbsp;Host ID&nbsp;** </span>
    - Identifies individual devices (hosts) within that network
    - Ensures data packets are delivered to the correct device
    - Example: In `192.168.1.10`, the Host ID is `10`
- **Hosts**
    - Devices connected to the network that can send and receive data, including:
        - Computers
        - Servers
        - Routers
        - IoT devices
    - Switches **are not considered hosts**, is a network device that connects multiple devices within a local area network(LAN)

　
### 5. Key Concepts
- **Subnet Mask**
    - Determines the size of the network by distinguishing the <span style="background-color:#FFFACD"> &nbsp;network ID&nbsp; </span> from the <span style="background-color:#F0F8FF"> &nbsp;host ID&nbsp; </span>
    - Common subnet masks: `255.0.0.0` for Class A, `255.255.0.0` for Class B, and `255.255.255.0` for Class C.
- **Default Gateway**: Information on how to exit the network to communicate with external websites—essentially the fastest route out of the network.

<br>
## IP Classes Explained
---
### IP Classes
There are five classes of IP addresses: `A, B, C, D, and E`
- `A, B and C` are primarily used for hosting addressing
- `D and E` are reserved for multicast and experimental purpose

　
### Class A
- First octet starts with `0`: `0xxxxxxx`
- Value range: `0 to 127` (i.e., $2^7 - 1$)
- **IP Range**: `0.0.0.0` to `127.255.255.255`
- Example: 127.0.0.1
- For devices to be in the same network, the first octet must be the same
- Network ID helps to divide the network. For example, 0.0.0.0 and 0.255.255.255 are in the same network, while 0.0.0.0 and 1.0.0.0 are not.
- There are 128 networks (0-127), with each network supporting $2^{24}$ IPs
- Total available Class A IPs: $2^{31}$

　
### Class B
- First octet starts with `10`: `10xxxxxx`.
- Value range: 128 to 191.
- **IP Range**: 128.0.0.0 to 191.255.255.255.
- For devices to be in the same network, the first two octets must be the same.
- Class B has 64 x 256 networks (totaling $2^{14}$).
- Each network can have $2^{16}$ IPs (65,536 IPs), leading to potential waste.

　
### Class C
- First octet starts with `110`: `110xxxxx`.
- Value range: 192 to 223.
- **IP Range**: 192.0.0.0 to 223.255.255.255.
- For devices to be in the same network, the first three octets must be the same.
- Class C supports 32 x 256 x 256 networks (totaling $2^{21}$), with each network containing 256 IPs.

<br>
## Subnet Mask
---
- Divides a network into smaller segments.
  - Class A: `255.0.0.0` (Network ID: 1, Host ID: 0).
  - Class B: `255.255.0.0`.
  - Class C: `255.255.255.0`.

## Importance of Subnet Mask
---
- Helps identify the number of available IP addresses within a network.
- For example, an IP of `192.168.100.124` with a subnet mask of `255.255.255.0` indicates it is in Class C, where the address range is from `192.168.100.0` to `192.168.100.255`.
- Classful addressing automatically knows the subnet mask, while classless addressing requires explicit subnet masks to determine the Network ID.
- Classless addressing is now more common to avoid IP wastage.

## Addressing: Network and Broadcast
For example, in Class C with IP `192.168.100.124` and subnet mask `255.255.255.0`:
- **Network Address**: `192.168.100.0` (first address).
- **Broadcast Address**: `192.168.100.255` (last address).
- Total number of usable hosts:
  - Total Addresses - Network Address - Broadcast Address = 256 - 1 - 1 = **254**

## Prefix Notation
- **Prefix**: The number of 1s in the binary representation of the subnet mask.
- Example: For IP `192.168.1.0` with subnet mask `255.255.255.0`, the prefix is `24` (because there are 24 1s).
- **Classful Prefixes**:
  - Class A: 8
  - Class B: 16
  - Class C: 24
- A higher prefix number indicates a smaller network size.

## CIDR (Classless Inter-Domain Routing)
CIDR is a method for allocating IP addresses and IP routing that improves the efficiency of address space utilization.

## Subnetting
Subnetting is the process of dividing a single subnet into multiple subnets.

### Example of Subnetting
- **Original network**: `192.168.1.0 / 24`.

#### After subnetting:
- Change from `192.168.1.0 / 24` to `192.168.1.0 / 25`.
- The subnet mask changes to `255.255.255.128`, indicating a split in the network.
